Israel's war on Gaza has bombed an area
with an intensity that military analysts
say hasn't been seen since the second
world war most of the Weaponry is
supplied by the United States is this
war different to others in terms of its
scale and speed this is Inside
Story
[Music]
hello welcome to the program I'm Tom
McCrae Israel's war on Gaza has killed
more than 177,000 Palestinians injured
tens of thousands and forced almost 2
million people from their homes many of
which have been destroyed Palestinians
can't leave Gaza the narrow strip of
land that is not only one of the most
densely populated areas in the world but
now one of the most bombed some military
analysts say the scale of isra is's
attacks exceeds that of other mass air
strikes in modern history such as the
Allied Forces destruction of Dresden in
Germany and World War II the civilian
death toll and the rate at which they're
being killed has also not been seen in
modern times now much of the Weaponry
Israel uses is supplied by the US which
has called for the protection of
civilians is that possible or is it a
deadly contradiction with Palestinians
the victims we'll be discussing that
with our guests in just a few moments
but first this report from Finton
Monahan on Israel's weapons of death in
Gaza Israel's war on Gaza has caused
major Devastation around 70% of
buildings in the north of the strip are
in ruins more than 177,000 Palestinians
have been killed and around 85% of
gaza's 2.3 million people have been
forced to move some from their hospital
beds many countries including the United
States have called on Israel to do more
to protect civilians Israel has the most
sophisticated one of the most
sophisticated militaries in the world it
is capable of neutralizing the threat
posed by Hamas while minimizing harm to
innocent men women and children and it
has an obligation to do so European NATO
member countries such as the UK Italy
and Germany are among those who supplied
Israel with the weapons used in this war
but Israel's main military and financial
backer is the United States that's been
the case since its Creation with
widespread support from both Democratic
and Republican
administrations the US provides Israel
with military aid worth $3.8 billion
every year much of it is used to buy
state-of-the-art weapons in the early
days of the war US President Joe Biden
assured Israel it would receive
everything it needed for the campaign
against Hamas that the United States
stands with Israel we will not ever fail
to have their back we'll make sure that
they have the help their citizens need
and they can continue to defend
themselves while International criticism
is growing Israel is showing little sign
of changing its tactics or strategy and
since the beginning of the war the US
has only strengthened its support vincon
Mahan for Inside
Story well let's look at the scale of
Israel's war on Gaza the death toll far
exceeds that of previous conflicts there
for example in 2014 Israeli forces
killed about 2,2 100 Palestinians when
it attacked the strip compared to the
war in Ukraine where roughly 10,000
civilians have been killed in nearly two
years in just two months Israel has
killed more than 177,000 Palestinians
the Israeli Army uses a wide range of
Weaponry some are Precision weapons such
as small bombs and missiles launched
from helicopters and guided to their
targets but others are intended to
destroy large areas and penetrate
reinforced structures the Israeli Army
has dropped 900 kilogram bombs on Gaza
during this war according to the Wall
Street Journal the US has provided 100
of these known as bunker Buster
[Music]
bombs okay let's bring in our guest now
in Pittsburgh Pennsylvania is Colin
Clark research director at Global
intelligence and security consultancy
the sofan group in B in the UK is
Patrick buy a defense and security
Analyst at the University of bath and in
London is Sam peo Freeman a research
coordinator at campaign against arms
trade in the UK thank you all very much
for joining us on inside story today uh
first of all Colin if I can begin with
you can you just give us uh your initial
thoughts on the scale and of Destruction
uh in Gaza in terms of the number of
civilians killed in a very short space
of Time how would you characterize what
is happening at the
moment yeah it's a massive and
overwhelming humanitarian catastrophe I
think in the uh introduction uh you
mentioned 177,000 civilians killed which
is just an unbelievable loss of life uh
the images that we're seeing every day
from Gaza are heart-wrenching uh and I
think you know as uh US Secretary of
Defense Lloyd Austin spoke about
recently uh the Israelis uh whatever
tactical Victory they're getting uh will
come at a strategic loss because of the
images that the world uh is seeing on a
daily basis and I think uh I completely
agree with Secretary of Defense Austin
um I think a lot of what's happening
right now is counterproductive and this
hunt to eliminate or destroy or
eradicate Hamas uh you know at what cost
is what I would ask yeah Patrick if we
can just continue on with with that
thought the Strategic loss that uh
Israel could suffer here I mean Israel
has constantly right from the very
beginning of this war has said that its
aim is to wipe him Mas off the face of
the Earth but from a military
perspective I mean is this aerial
bombing campaign that we've seen for two
months now is this the right way to go
about trying to do that well it's the
easier way isn't it Tom and you know on
the annihilation strategic aim as Colin
has pointed out earlier you know all
Hamas have to do is survive in some form
and they've won uh if that's and it's
very hard to completely eradicate any
terrorist groups the last you know 20
years at least have shown us so um but
look the air bombardment yeah it's the
easy way of doing it theyve stand off
obviously Israeli intelligence was
caught napping here from numerous
different reasons so they their eyes and
ears into the gas of strip are not as
good as it were uh as it was at one
point and um and as a result you you you
select your uh standoff Munitions and
you bombard them heavily relied as you
mentioned on the US to keep your your
stocks rolling um and clearly again the
targeting uh the targeting cells here
and the crucially the IDE a what this
hinges on in this bombardment it is
intense it's intense in relation to
mosul it's intense in relation to what
we saw happen in C it's intense in
relation to even the battles in maral uh
and and and bmot probably on a similar
intensity but the difference with those
urbanized battles was most of the
civilians had left yeah and there been
corridors to get people out that's the
Cru so that's why we're seeing secondly
it's incredibly uh densely populated
area and highly urbanized so in your in
your introduction when you talked about
the same kind of damage to buildings as
the second world war yeah it is but
there's a there's a there's a an element
here of everything being condensed which
is which is actually adding to it as
well doesn't excuse it but it helps
start to explain some of the reasons why
you're seeing such high uh casualty and
destruction notes but also it comes back
to this idea of their Munitions that
they're selecting and the principles
under law of armed conflict which are
about proportionality which must be
balanced the risk to civilians must be
balanced to the concrete and direct
military gains to be made from taking
that action and that's ultimately for
IDF lawyers to understand and after
they've been attacked yeah those those
that idea of proportionality it's not
actually written down exactly what that
should be so in the targeting cells they
draw radiuses around why where they
think they are they can say that we
didn't think uh there were that many
civilians there they can say that this
Hamas Commander is incredibly important
and therefore we're selecting or there's
a bunker there and we're electing a
2,000 pounder and they can drop it on it
and if it kills you know uh 10 civilians
100 civilians you know the Israelis are
just like well we went through the
process of
proportionality right Colin I I want to
pick on pick up on one thing that
Patrick was talking about there I mean
is this campaign from Israel even
actually working at this point in time
because according to the Israeli
military of the 30,000 Hamas Fighters
that they believe are in Gaza they've
killed about 5,000 of them that's only
roughly about 16% after 2 months what do
you make of how effective their campaign
has been to this point in
time well you know I was actually just
this morning reading an article from uh
Robert Pape in foreign affairs uh one of
the the world's leading experts on air
power and coercive power and and you
know I agreed with the thesis of the
article which is that the campaign is
not working um this far in um this many
weeks into the conflict to uh to be at
this point to to me it's clear that uh
what's started as perhaps you know uh
strategic military objectives has
potentially morphed into revenge and
Vengeance and Collective punishment uh
some would argue as Pape does in the
article so uh you know only eradicating
5,000 of 30,000 Hamas uh militants not a
total surprise to me you know given the
infrastructure in Gaza given the tunnel
network uh but this is hard fighting
this is dense Urban Warfare uh and I
think you know if you think about some
of the high ranking Hamas commanders
they were likely shuttled out of the
country uh into potentially Lebanon into
Iran elsewhere uh before the actual
attack on October 7th so um the Israelis
are not going to be able to eradicate
Hamas and that says nothing about
Israel's military prowess this is one of
the most powerful militaries in the
world it says more about you know the
feasibility of completely eradicating a
terrorist organization so I think the
aims and objectives need to be properly
scoped and Israel needs to immediately
begin thinking about how to attach its
military strategy to some kind of a
political outcome or negotiated
settlement because that's the only way
this is actually going to end yeah Sam I
want to go to you now I I know you and
your organization have been
investigating uh the arms that have
being supplied to Israel what have you
found so far and has anything surprised
you
well as a lot of the US arms trade to
Israel is well known as your reporter
said all the aircraft that um the the
fixed wi combat aircraft that Israel
uses in Gaza the f-35s and
f-16s come from the US along with a lot
of the Munitions um since October 7th uh
the the the US has supplied by December
1st around 15,000 bombs and 57,000
artillery shells uh according to Media
reports that includes those 100 bunker
Buster bombs um that um Patrick was
talking about uh Israel of course
produces a lot of its own arms but of
course the modern arms trade has a very
wide and International Supply Chain so a
lot of companies and countries are
involved in the production of aircraft
like the F-16 and F35 with the F-35 the
the stealth fighter the UK in particular
produces
15% of the value of every aircraft
produced in including those that go to
Israel this includes things like the um
the rear fuselage the a lot of
electronic systems uh the ejector seat
uh all sorts of of system of sub system
systems uh and we actually got on a
freedom of information request a list of
all the UK companies that are involved
in this program and it is it is dozens
of companies that are involved now we
don't know if any new f-35s have been
supplied since the war started but
combat aircraft especially in an intense
campaign like this need a constant
supply of spare parts so undoubtedly all
the aircraft that Israel has is going
going to be continually needing new
spares from all from all or most of
these companies involved in this
International Supply
Chain I want to go uh to you now Patrick
uh you touched on this a little bit
before but can you just give us a little
bit of historical context uh I mean how
does this compare you mentioned Mosel
but how does this compare with other
bombing campaigns that we have seen over
the last few
decades well yeah mosto was the direct
comparison because in the first week of
the Israeli response they dropped more
bombs I think it was 6,000 than the US
and its Coalition Partners dropped
against isil in the Battle of mosul in a
month um so that that's comparatively
you know how it adds up to something
recent as as six years ago um look in
terms of like look Warfare what we're
seeing is becoming more organized
there's more more cities uh they're more
densely populated uh and armies are
actually smaller and so Warfare and the
advantage to the defender uh means that
it it it coalesces in these areas uh
which makes it very very destructive
we've seen Aleppo destroyed mosul
destroyed C destroyed um we've seen as I
mentioned maral and bmot so it's
happening in a a broader trend of more
urbanized Warfare um and I think
unfortunately for all those stuck in
Gaza it's a particularly I mentioned
densely populated densely urbanized and
therefore more lethal environment um and
as I mentioned again this this concept
of proportionality which uh is obviously
you know for example I served in
Afghanistan in the British Army and we
in 2008 we were in a fairly fairly rough
place called sangin uh where we took a
lot of casualties and halfway through
the tour to to stop civilian casualties
we weren't allowed fire 81 mm mortors
anymore now they're fairly small in
terms of lethality we couldn't call in
105 mm guns this is at a or you know an
order of magnitude way below what uh
what what what uh Israel are using at
the moment in actually a situation which
is relatively similar it was a high
intensity counterinsurgency campaign but
again as secretary Lloyd said you know
what we were trying to do there was
separate the insurgence the Narco
Taliban essentially from the people uh
as best we could and the Israelis this
is completely lacking as Colin mentioned
it's just creating a counterterrorism
nightmare I would say for the next
decade in the region and Beyond um uh
and so you know another course instead
of standoff air power could have been
especially in this second phase after
the ceasefire could have been much more
Cordon sanit start to gain the
intelligence picture you need you can be
damn sure there's Palestinians in there
who aren't fans of Hamas after this
after what's been brought on them in you
know and not in their name but um and
start to build the intelligence picture
again and use your special forces and
surveillance Advantage which you're
going to need to build up again to
basically get in there and in a dirty
war
degrade uh Hamas military Wing
especially as to Absolute minimum that
you can yeah Colin for decades countries
have have sought to to bomb their
enemies into submission but also to try
and shatter civilian morale I mean the
theory is that when uh push to Breaking
Point populations will actually rise up
and and I guess push back against their
own
governments I mean we have seen that not
work with Russia uh bombing Ukraine that
that obviously hasn't didn't work there
it didn't work when the Germans bombed
uh the UK in World War II or when the
Allies bombed uh Germany extensively in
World War II as well do you think that
there is any chance of it working
here it just flies in the face of the
empirical evidence that we have on
counterinsurgency uh I spent 10 years at
the ran Corporation a think tank in the
United States uh and was lucky enough to
be able to have several years carved out
and devoted my time to studying every
single Insurgency from the end of World
War II to 2009 uh 71 in total based on
our uh coding schema and we found that
historically uh what we called an iron
fist approach which is certainly what
the Israelis are pursuing at the moment
uh is counterproductive and actually
counterinsurgents that pursue that
approach some might call it you know
scorched Earth uh they lose more than
they win so they're actually seeding the
advantage to their adversaries and Hamas
uh and I would just Echo something that
Patrick said earlier when uh you know
Netanyahu and the IDF came out very
early on in the conflict and said that
the stated goal was to completely
eradicate Hamas they essentially did
Hamas a huge favor it was a strategic
Communications failure on the Israelis
part because as Patrick me mentioned all
Hamas needs to do now to declare Victory
and i' put you know quotation marks
around Victory is survive and that's
certainly something they're going to do
the question isn't isn't is Hamas going
to survive we know that's the case how
you know how much intact will Hamas be
when all is said and done smoke and and
in what form will will they continue uh
Sam you mentioned we talked a little bit
about bunker bombs and the US has
supplied uh well according to the Wall
Street Journal 100 to Israel can you
just explain
to people who might not know exactly
what they are just how deadly and how
widespread the destruction can be from
just a single a single Bank of
bomb um I I'm not an expert on on the
precise uh lethality of different uh
Munitions but these are as we told 900
kilogram 2,000 pound bombs um and so
that is an enormous amount of
destructive power in what as uh uh our
other panelists have said is a very very
densely populated area and we have seen
cases like in jabali refugee camp where
a single strike has killed dozens if not
hundreds of Palestinians at one mostly
civilians in one go we don't know if
those bust Busters but um at any rate
the Munitions that Israel is using are
clearly uh big enough to cause such
utterly devastating totally
disproportionate uh death and and injury
and destruction and I would in um
response to what my colleagues here have
been talking about Israel if if Israel's
goal is military victory over Hamas
their strategy doesn't make sense but if
as several Israeli ministers and members
of the knesset have been saying if their
goal is to actually depopulate Gaza to
make the entire Gaza Strip unlivable and
force the population into Egypt then it
kind of does make sense okay I guess
because these are supplied by the United
States Patrick I mean is giving Israel
these weapons is the US explicitly
endorsing their use and then I guess if
you take it a step forther further is
the US complicit in any civilians that
are killed by the Israeli use of Us
weapons yeah well just on the on the
bunker Buster thing so usually when they
do these weapons tests they do it if
they're trying to work out lethality
they usually do them in the open right
so it's obviously more lethal in an
urbanized environment with buildings
collapsing around you but a bunker
Buster normally as far as I understand
depending on the payload would have a
lethal what we'd call in the in the
British Ministry a lethal blast area of
at least 100 meters radius so that's you
know draw that around to make out the
diameter um
so just on that yeah look it's an
interesting one clearly there's
different and Colin might be better uh
you know position to speak about the
inside the Biden Administration to me
but I think there's C certainly
different uh people pulling in different
directions about what should be done
here um although Biden seems fairly
clear uh that he's going to stay
steadfast in his support for Israel
certainly you know the US has a lot of
Leverage here if it wanted to use it um
and and of course you know where does it
get its Iron Dome uh where does isra get
its Iron Dome uh missiles from for
example to protect itself is the us so I
think the wheels would come off the
wagon although they do have an
indigenous you know big indigenous uh uh
industrial military
industrial um facilities the I I think
the the wheels would come off the wagon
in terms of the air campaign pretty
quickly if America decided that enough
was enough right well Colin I will throw
it over to you then I mean how much
pressure is on the US to to scal back
the the amount of money and weapons that
it is giving is
Israel I guess it depends pressure from
whom the United States when you look at
the domestic uh politics here is getting
pulled in two directions you've got uh
you know the the impetus to support
Israel particularly in an election year
at the same time if you look at the
younger voters genz and and below the
demographics show that uh you know that
kind of demographic is unhappy with
Biden's handling tend to be more Pro
Palestinian and pro-israeli so you know
I think the administration's trying to
read the tea leaves read the polls here
but instead of playing politics the more
important thing the moral thing would
just to be to do what right uh and to
apply maximum pressure on the Israelis
to limit civilian casualties uh and to
to not drop that as a talking point
right this isn't just something on a
checklist that you go down and say oh
yeah you know we should mention that as
well uh this is essential right because
the United States is associated with
this conf conflict and if you look at
the numbers dead this is not something
that's going to fade from the headlines
this is a moral stain on the United
States uh and so I think if the
administration can wield influence and
we know that it has in the past it needs
to do so and it needs to continue
applying that pressure and not
stop Sam amesty International and oh
sorry Patrick do you want to jump in
there I was just going to jump in there
I think also you know if this has been
happening in in Ukraine and obviously
terrible things have happened in Ukraine
at the Russian hands in terms of
Ukrainian civilians but if this was
happening in Ukraine the Western
condemnation would be much higher um and
and I think really you're looking at a
at a position now where the war crimes
thing should be put on the table and
kept on the table that if you cannot you
know that we will come after your
lawyers and we will come after your
targeting Sal uh and this should be
backed by the Gul States as well who for
you know all intents and purposes are
still pretty quiet they've been helping
some of them been helping with the
negotiations but the general consensus
seems to be to box this problem off as
best they can and get on with you know
building their economies at the moment
so I think internationally more can be
done yeah okay s well as we've seen in
yeah in in the last few days Amnesty
International put out a report saying
that Israel does need to be investigated
for possible war crimes is that
something that you and your organization
agree
with absolutely U of of course all war
crimes whether by Israel and Hamas must
be investigated uh but there is
overwhelming evidence that Israel has
been committing war crimes the blockade
on food water fuel is itself a war crime
it is collective punishment without a
doubt indeed there's a case that what
Israel is doing and many International
lawyers who know much more about it than
me uh that that what Israel is doing can
actually be classed as genocide and the
United States especially but also UK
Germany and others that are arming
Israel can also potentially in the dock
for aiding and abetting war crimes by
supplying these weapons continuing to
spy weapons and components in the full
knowledge of what Israel has been doing
and going to continue to do and so think
I mean the chances that Joe Biden would
ever actually be arrested and brought to
the ha are vanishingly small yes but I
think that americ officials British
officials Arms Company officials who are
making these decisions should be
watching their backs legally because the
possibility that they could be in the
frame for aiding and abetting war crimes
in Gaza is I think very real or at least
it ought to be okay Colin we've got a
couple of minutes left I want to finish
with you is Israel I guess how does this
end is Israel going to be allowed to
continue bombing until its Hearts
content do you think
well Allowed by whom again you know who
who's the ultimate Arbiter of of this
conflict so I think unless the Israelis
make this decision to stop it's it's not
going to uh my question is you know to
what end what are the aims is it
capturing and killing every Hamas high
value Target uh is it you know totally
attempting to decimate hamas's military
infrastructure is that even possible uh
and again I'll go back to what I've been
saying since essentially October 8th
unless this military approach and
campaign uh and operational objectives
are tied to some kind of political
element uh then it's all for not because
uh the Israelis have a term for for what
they've been doing uh which is mowing
the grass right uh and this this can't
go on any further to do this every
couple of years to have these uh allout
congrations in the region there's got to
be some kind of end and I think unless
there's a you know a sustainable
political solution here coming out of
the back end of this fighting we'll be
back here a year from now you know 18
months from now there will be no end
okay thank you so much oh sorry Patrick
do you want to jump in there very
quickly I was just gonna say I think Tim
might have put his put put his finger on
the uh the pulse there where where he
said that maybe it's actually just to to
drive them out now okay thank you we've
run out of time but we really do
appreciate uh you joining us here on
Inside Story Colin Clark Patrick buy and
Sam Perlo Freeman thank you well thank
you as well for watching you can see the
program again anytime by visiting our
website ala.com and for further
discussion go to our Facebook page
that's
facebook.com/ AJ insidestory you can
also join the conversation on X our
handle is at AJ insid story for me Tom
McCrae and the whole team here bye for
now